Narrative Review
1
Medicine
®
Selection of anesthetic agents for obstructive 
jaundice
An update for anesthesiologists
Yi-Qing Li, BSa, Xuefei Zhou, BSb, Yunfei Cao, MDb,*
, Yue Long, MDc
Abstract 
Obstructive jaundice is induced by complete or partial obstruction of the common bile duct, which causes bile to overflow from 
the digestive system into the circulatory system. Clinically, such patients often require surgical interventions to relieve obstructive 
jaundice, but the extensive and complex pathophysiological changes associated with obstructive jaundice not only lead to a 
higher incidence of perioperative morbidity and mortality, but also significantly affect the pharmacological properties of anesthetic 
agents, which poses a major challenge to anesthesia management. Therefore, this article reviews the research progress on the 
pharmacological properties of anesthesia in obstructive jaundice in the past 20 years, and focuses on the influence of obstructive 
jaundice on the pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of inhaled anesthetics, intravenous anesthetics, opioid analgesics, and 
muscle relaxants commonly used in clinic. In fact, alterations in pharmacological properties of these anesthetic agents induced 
by obstructive jaundice vary widely. For example, patients with obstructive jaundice have increased sensitivities and decreased 
requirements to desflurane, etomidate, and rocuronium, while propofol and atracurium are almost not affected. In addition, 
the effects of these drugs on the functions of vital organs in jaundiced patients are also discussed in detail. Anesthesiologists 
should be aware of the importance of rational use of anesthetic agents in jaundiced patients during operation, and the selection 
of appropriate anesthetics on the basis of comprehensive evaluation and the precise adjustment of dosage based on strict 
intraoperative monitoring, are crucial to ensure the stability of anesthesia and reduce perioperative risks.
Abbreviations: BDL = bile duct ligation, MAC = minimum alveolar concentration.
Keywords: anesthesiologists, anesthetic agents, obstructive jaundice, update
1. Introduction
Obstructive jaundice, also known as surgical jaundice, is a 
common pathological condition characterized by increased 
serum bilirubin levels due to partial or complete mechani-
cal obstruction of intrahepatic or extrahepatic bile ducts.[1,2] 
Choledocholithiasis is the primary cause of this obstruction, 
with other contributors including periampullary cancers, 
inflammation, trauma, bile duct stenosis, and even congenital 
biliary atresia.[1,3] Patients with obstructive jaundice usually 
require surgical interventions to relieve the primary lesion and 
obstruction, and many of them have high preoperative biliru-
bin levels and often need to undergo endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography or percutaneous transhepatic 
drainage first to reduce jaundice levels and minimize periop-
erative risks.[4,5] However, even such preoperative intervention 
usually needs to be performed under anesthesia to enhance 
the patient’s cooperation and comfort, and to facilitate 
procedural manipulations.[1,4] Therefore, anesthesiologists still 
have to face these complex and specific patients with severe 
jaundice.[2,6] The diverse pathophysiological derangements 
and systemic toxic effects related to obstructive jaundice 
make the perioperative management markedly distinct from 
other patient populations, which may easily be associate with 
high perioperative morbidity and mortality, and pose consid-
erable challenges to anesthesiologists, surgeons, and intensive 
care teams.[1,2]
Fortunately, over the past 2 decades, ongoing exploration, 
predominantly from Chinese scholars, has systematically eluci-
dated the anesthetic specificity of obstructive jaundice, including 
alterations in anesthetic sensitivity, reductions in pain thresh-
old, changes in pharmacokinetics, and the effects of anesthetics 
on cardiopulmonary and renal function in jaundiced patients. 
These achievements and updated insights are of great impor-
tance for clinical practice, and anesthesiologists can accord-
ingly select optimal perioperative anesthesia management for 
 
This study was funded by a grant from Natural Science Foundation of Ningbo 
Municipality [Granted number: 202003N4036] (Ningbo, China).
The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published 
article [and its supplementary information files].
No ethical approval or patient consent was required because all narration and 
content were based on previous literature review.
a Department of Anesthesiology, Ningbo Medical Center Lihuili Hospital, Ningbo 
University, Ningbo, China, b Department of Anesthesiology, Beilun District 
People’s Hospital of Ningbo, Ningbo, China, c Department of Anesthesiology, 921 
Hospital, Joint Service Support Force of People’s Liberation Army, Changsha, 
China.
* Correspondence: Yunfei Cao, Department of Anesthesiology, Beilun District 
People’s Hospital of Ningbo, Ningbo, China (e-mail: caoyunfeicn@sina.com).
Copyright © 2025 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.
This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons 
Attribution License 4.0 (CCBY), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and 
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
How to cite this article: Li Y-Q, Zhou X, Cao Y, Long Y. Selection of anesthetic 
agents for obstructive jaundice: An update for anesthesiologists. Medicine 
2025;104:26(e43074).
Received: 5 May 2024 / Received in final form: 9 June 2025 / Accepted: 12 June 
2025
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000043074


2
Li et al.  •  Medicine (2025) 104:26
Medicine
jaundiced patients, so as to minimize perioperative risks and 
contribute a favorable outcome.
2. Selection of inhaled anesthetics for obstructive 
jaundice
Neurological symptoms, encompassing impairments in mental 
status, intellectual functioning, alertness, and motor function, 
are frequently observed in patients with obstructive jaundice, 
and may further progress to “hepatic encephalopathy” or coma 
as jaundice persists or worsens.[7] Animal studies have also con-
firmed that cholestatic jaundice was linked to spatial deficits in 
rats with bile duct ligated for 3 weeks, and these cognitive defi-
cits could be reversed by biliary drainage.[8] Obviously, these 
pathological states of brain function induced by obstructive 
jaundice may also affect the sensitivity to certain anesthetics. 
Previous studies demonstrated a significant decrease in the 
minimum alveolar concentration for awakening (MACawake) of 
desflurane in patients with obstructive jaundice as compared to 
non-jaundiced controls (1.78 ± 0.19% vs 2.17 ± 0.25%), with 
a highly inverse relation between MACawake of desflurane and 
serum total bilirubin concentration.[9] Similar increased sensi-
tivity to isoflurane and prolonged recovery time under sevoflu-
rane anesthesia were also observed in patients with obstructive 
jaundice.[10] Moreover, due to the increased sensitivity to anes-
thetic agents, patients with obstructive jaundice are prone to 
hypotension and bradycardia during the induction and main-
tenance of anesthesia. Therefore, a relative reduction in the 
dose of inhaled anesthetics is recommended for patients with 
obstructive jaundice, and intraoperative monitoring should 
be emphasized, especially for patients using a single inhaled 
anesthetics.
It is worth mentioning that there may also be central regional 
differences in the effect of obstructive jaundice on the sensitiv-
ity to inhaled anesthetics. Chen et al observed a reduction in 
MACawake of sevoflurane in infants scheduled for abdominal 
surgery with obstructive jaundice compared to nonjaundiced 
controls (1.00 ± 0.15% vs 1.40 ± 0.21%), and also a negative 
correlation between serum total bilirubin levels and the prob-
ability of awakening (OR = 0.984). Interestingly, no significant 
difference was noted in the MAC for endotracheal intubation 
(MACEI) of sevoflurane between jaundiced and nonjaundiced 
infants.[11] This discrepancy may be attributed to the distinct 
central target regions and mechanisms involved in MACEI and 
MACawake of isoflurane. As it is known that the target areas of 
anesthesia-induced hypnosis and amnesia are mainly located in 
the cerebral cortex, the enhanced hypnotic effect of isoflurane is 
more likely to be secondary to the altered corticocerebral func-
tional state caused by obstructive jaundice, while MACEI, which 
represents the antinociceptive reflex of anesthetics, is mainly 
located in the subcortical center. However, it is unclear whether 
obstructive jaundice has distinct effects on cortical and subcor-
tical centers.
It is worth noting that the central pathological changes 
caused by obstructive jaundice may become irreversible as jaun-
dice persists. Then, even if the duct obstruction is relieved or 
hyperbilirubin levels are lowered, the change in sensitivity to 
inhaled anesthetics may also be difficult to recover, which needs 
the attention of anesthesiologists, but no definite study has been 
reported so far.[7] In addition, obstructive jaundice can often 
be accompanied by liver function impairment, so the selection 
of drugs with hepatorenal toxicity such as halothane should 
be avoided. Other commonly used inhaled anesthetics, such 
as enflurane, isoflurane, etc, have no obvious adverse effects 
on liver function, and there is no special contraindication for 
patients with hepatobiliary diseases such as obstructive jaun-
dice. The study by Arenas YM et al also confirmed that sevo-
flurane used in hepatectomy for patients with cirrhosis did not 
cause damage to renal function.[12]
Although studies have shown that bile acids and their medi-
ated signaling may play a role in inducing blood–brain barrier 
permeability,[13] neuroinflammation,[14] and exacerbating neuro-
logical decline,[15] the exact cause or underlying mechanism of 
increased sensitivity to inhaled anesthetics in jaundiced patients 
remains unknown. As inhaled anesthetics such as isoflurane and 
desflurane have low blood solubility and little metabolism in 
vivo, and are predominantly eliminated by the lung rather than 
the liver and kidneys, their pharmacokinetic characteristics are 
unlikely to significantly differ in jaundiced patients, even with 
pathophysiological changes such as impaired liver function and 
extracellular fluid depletion.[9,10,16] Thus, altered neurotransmis-
sion and neurotoxicity in the brain due to obstructive jaundice 
may play a role in the altered sensitivities of inhaled anesthetics. 
Studies in animal models have confirmed that obstructive jaun-
dice can produce a wide range of neurotoxicity to brain tissue, 
naturally involving central action areas or targets of inhaled 
anesthetics. In a well-characterized canine model of cholestasis 
secondary to bile duct resection, histologic evidence of nerve 
damage, such as simple atrophy and pyknosis of nerve cells, 
neuronophagia, and ghost cells, was observed in the brain, and 
neurologic damage may extend from the basal ganglia, putamen 
and red nucleus to the thalamus, cerebral cortex and substan-
tia nigra, with prolonged obstructive jaundice.[17] Similar ultra-
structural changes were observed in Wistar albino rats after bile 
duct ligation (BDL), including degenerated glial cells, apoptotic 
electron-dense neurons, and blood–brain barrier deterioration 
in the cerebral cortex, and the duration of obstructive jaundice 
correlated with the extent of neurologic damage.[7] It was also 
confirmed that the impairment of brain functions such as mem-
ory and motor coordination in cholestatic rats was associated 
with alteration of neuroinflammation and GABAergic neuro-
transmission in the cerebellum.[12] In fact, almost all classical 
neurotransmitter systems, including opioidergic, dopaminergic, 
cholinergic, GABAergic, adrenergic, serotonergic, and glutama-
tergic systems, have been found to be altered in both jaundiced 
patients or cholestatic animal models.[18] For instance, defective 
serotoninergic neurotransmission, which was considered to be 
sensitive to inhaled anesthetics, may partly explain the reduced 
needs for anesthetic requirement in patients with obstructive 
jaundice. As midbrain somatodendritic 5-HT1A autoreceptors, 
which play a central inhibitory role in the regulation of sero-
tonergic neurotransmission, appears to be altered in rats with 
experimental cholestatic liver disease, as shown by enhanced 
5-HT1A autoreceptor-mediated physiological responsiveness 
(hypothermia and bulimia) in the setting of increased midbrain 
5-HT1A receptor number but not affinity.[19] Also, in choles-
tatic male Wistar rats induced by BDL, a decrease in memory 
retrieval occurred 11 days after BDL, and the possible involve-
ment of dorsal hippocampal glutamatergic systems was con-
formed upon cholestasis-induced amnesia.[7]
In summary, the toxic effects of jaundice on the central ner-
vous system, including histologic evidence of neurologic dam-
age and altered neurotransmission in the brain, which are 
considered to be critical targets for inhaled anesthetics, may 
lead to increased sensitivity to anesthetics and reduce anesthetic 
requirements. However, it should be pointed out that the impact 
of obstructive jaundice on the central nervous system is differ-
ent from that of bilirubin encephalopathy,[2,15,16] the former is 
mainly caused by elevated bound bilirubin, while the latter is 
unbound bilirubin.
3. Selection of intravenous anesthetics for 
obstructive jaundice
Due to concerns about environmental pollution of inhaled 
anesthetics, intravenous anesthetics are the most commonly 
used in clinical practice. Therefore, for patients with obstruc-
tive jaundice, whether it is procedural sedation outside the 


3
Li et al.  •  Medicine (2025) 104:26
www.md-journal.com
operating room or general anesthesia inside the operating room, 
the choice of intravenous anesthetics is particularly important. 
Though obstructive jaundice can alter the sensitivities of most 
anesthetic agents, propofol appears to be an exception. Song 
JC et al adopted bispectral index and mean arterial pressure 
as indices of the anesthetic potency of propofol, revealing that 
obstructive jaundice within a serum total bilirubin ranging from 
7.8 to 362.7 µmol/L had no discernible impact on propofol 
pharmacodynamics.[20] In contrast, patients with obstructive 
jaundice required a lower amount of etomidate, another intra-
venous anesthetics, to achieve a predefined level of anesthe-
sia compared to non-jaundiced controls, that is, patients with 
obstructive jaundice have increased sensitivity to etomidate. 
Moreover, a significant negative correlation was found between 
serum total bilirubin levels and etomidate requirements.[21] The 
differential sensitivity of jaundiced patients to etomidate and 
propofol can be attributed, in part, to the distinct central tar-
gets of these 2 drugs,[22,23] as studies have shown that propofol 
exerted anesthetic potency not only by binding to the β subunit 
of the postsynaptic GABAA receptor, but also acted on other 
receptors (such as glycine, M1 muscarinic acid and nicotinic acid 
receptors),[22] while etomidate is a pure hypnotic GABA agonist, 
and appears to produce hypnosis, amnesia, and inhibition of 
nociceptive responses almost exclusively via actions at GABAA 
receptor.[23] Additionally, animal studies have confirmed that bil-
irubin potentiated GABA/glycanergic inhibitory synaptic trans-
mission in the lateral superior olivary nucleus neurons of rats, 
which may contribute to the increased sensitivity to etomidate 
induced by obstructive jaundice.[24] Despite the potential impact 
of obstructive jaundice on liver function and drug-metabolizing 
enzymes,[1] it is noteworthy that obstructive jaundice seemingly 
has no effect on the pharmacokinetics of either propofol or eto-
midate.[25,26] A comparative study of patients with or without 
obstructive jaundice showed similarities in several pharmaco-
kinetic parameters and halftime of the 3 phases [T(1/2) (alpha), 
T(1/2) (beta), T(1/2) (gamma)], suggesting that obstructive 
jaundice does not influence the pharmacokinetics of propo-
fol.[25] Moreover, moderate liver dysfunction does not appear to 
affect propofol clearance due to its existence of an extrahepatic 
metabolic pathway.[27,28] Further studies affirmed that the phar-
macokinetics of etomidate remained unchanged in the presence 
of obstructive jaundice, and a 3-compartment open model best 
described the concentration profile of etomidate after bolus infu-
sion for anesthesia induction.[26] However, the plasma clearance 
and distribution volume of dexmedetomidine, predominantly 
metabolized and excreted by the liver, were decreased by 33.3% 
and 29.2%, respectively, in patients with obstructive jaundice 
as compared to non-jaundiced patients.[26] The changes of liver 
blood flow and the damage of drug metabolism enzyme system 
caused by obstructive jaundice may contribute to the decrease 
of plasma clearance and distribution volume of dexmedetomi-
dine. Therefore, the use of dexmedetomidine in patients with 
obstructive jaundice also requires dose adjustment.
Both clinical and animal studies have demonstrated that 
obstructive jaundice can impair the liver’s drug-metabolizing 
enzyme system. In rat models, the content of total cytochrome 
P450 significantly decreased after bile duct ligation and recov-
ered after bile duct drainage.[29] However, the components of 
cytochrome P450 family are extremely complex, and the impact 
on different components can vary significantly in response 
to obstructive jaundice. For instance, CYP3A4 isoform is an 
essential member of the liver cytochrome P450 enzyme family, 
which is mainly responsible for metabolizing a variety of intra-
venous anesthetics and sedative agents (including diazepam, 
midazolam, fentanyl, lidocaine, etc).[30] The isomeric activity 
of CYP3A4 is significantly decreased in patients with cirrhosis, 
but obstructive jaundice alone does not affect the activity of 
CYP3A4, and the significant changes in the activities of these 
metabolic enzymes may primarily occur in the biliary cirrhosis 
or liver failure associated with obstructive jaundice.[31] However, 
the effects of obstructive jaundice on the pharmacokinetics and 
metabolites of many intravenous anesthetics metabolized by 
liver, such as benzodiazepines, dexmedetomidine, ketamine, etc, 
have not been reported so far.
Although propofol has outstanding clinical advantages and 
its pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics are not affected 
by obstructive jaundice, it is still controversial whether propo-
fol is suitable for patients with obstructive jaundice due to its 
obvious cardiovascular inhibition, and jaundiced patients are 
prone to hypotension and bradycardia when induced and main-
tained with propofol.[6] Animal studies indicated that propofol 
depressed cardiac parameters similarly in bile duct-ligated and 
sham-operated rats at low and intermediate doses, and only at 
a high dose, might propofol cause severe cardiac depression in 
jaundiced rats.[32] Interestingly, propofol itself also has a certain 
protective effect on cardiovascular function.[25] Clinical obser-
vations have shown that, compared with isoflurane or low-dose 
propofol, intravenous administration of high-dose propofol 
during cardiopulmonary bypass could reduce postoperative 
myocardial cell damage,[33] but its specific mechanism remained 
unclear. Overall, the current consensus is that low and interme-
diate doses of propofol are safe for jaundiced patients.[34]
For patients with obstructive jaundice, etomidate is another 
intravenous anesthetics that can be considered. However, the 
pharmacodynamics of etomidate may be affected by obstruc-
tive jaundice, so its clinical dose should be adjusted or reduced 
accordingly in jaundiced patients. Of course, etomidate also 
has its advantages, prominently manifested in its less impact on 
hemodynamics, for instance, during endoscopic retrograde chol-
angiopancreatography anesthesia, the hemodynamics of etomi-
date are more stable than those of propofol, and the choice of 
etomidate can help avoid severe hypotension.[35]
In addition, contrary to the hepatotoxicity associated with 
some inhaled anesthetics, many intravenous anesthetics offer 
potential benefits for obstructive jaundice. As in cholestatic rat 
models, anesthesia with ketamine and propofol induced mini-
mal renal tissue oxidative stress, and the protective effect and 
importance of these intravenous anesthetics on free radical dam-
age of renal tissue in jaundiced patients during perioperative 
period should also be considered, which may help prevent the 
occurrence of postoperative acute renal failure.[36] Additionally, 
It has also been reported that obstructive jaundice may severely 
affect the biochemical and immune function, while dexmedeto-
midine can reduce the concentration of inflammatory mediators 
IL-6 and TNF-α through PI3K/Akt/HIF-1α signaling pathway, 
and alleviate lung injury in jaundiced rats.[37]
4. Selection of analgesic for obstructive jaundice
It has long been found that obstructive jaundice is often accom-
panied by an increase in the level of plasma endogenous opi-
oids. In cholestatic rats with bile duct resection, total plasma 
opioid activity was 3-fold greater than that in sham-operated 
controls, and plasma methionine-enkephalin levels were more 
than 6-fold greater than in sham-operated controls and more 
than 17-fold greater than in unoperated controls, indicating 
the profound impact of cholestasis on endogenous opioid lev-
els.[38] Similarly, Tao K et al confirmed that the plasma level of 
β-endorphin was increased in jaundiced patients as compared 
with non-jaundiced group (286.6 ± 14.5 vs 193.9 ± 9.6 pg/mL), 
though no significant differences were observed in cerebrospinal 
fluid and liver tissue concentrations between the 2 groups.[39] 
Other studies showed that elevated plasma endogenous opioids 
may contribute to the pathophysiology of cholestasis, such as 
cardiovascular, liver, and renal function impairment, as well as 
pruritus and antinociception.[40]
The elevated endogenous opioid levels accompanied with 
obstructive jaundice and the resulting antinociceptive effects 
(analgesia), also altered the sensitivity and need for opioid 


4
Li et al.  •  Medicine (2025) 104:26
Medicine
analgesics, and had a greater impact on perioperative anal-
gesia. The study by Yang LQ et al demonstrated decreased 
intraoperative requirements of isoflurane and remifentanil 
in jaundiced patients.[6] And patients with obstructive jaun-
dice showed a higher pain threshold for electrical stimula-
tion(1.7 ± 0.3 vs 1.1 ± 0.1 mA), whereas 48-h postoperative 
morphine consumption was approximately 50% higher in 
none-jaundiced patients than that in jaundiced patients.[40] All 
these studies suggested that perioperative opioid analgesics 
should be appropriately reduced in patients with obstructive 
jaundice. However, plasma β-endorphin levels did not correlate 
with electrical pain thresholds or 48-hour morphine consump-
tion, suggesting the involvement of other endogenous opioids, 
such as met-enkephalin, in the increased pain threshold asso-
ciated with obstructive jaundice.[40] Research by Ahmadi S et 
al further confirmed that cholestatic rats showed significant 
antinociception 2 weeks after bile duct ligation which could 
be prevented by naloxone, and the expression of µ-opioid 
receptor-1 gene in the central hypothalamus, prefrontal cortex 
and hippocampus was significantly decreased, while no sig-
nificant change was observed in the striatum.[41] However, in 
general, central opioidergic tone appears increased in cholesta-
sis syndrome, possibly due to the increased availability of 
endogenous opioid agonists at opioid receptors in the brain, 
as the opioidergic system has been shown to play a role in 
some cholestatic-induced behaviors, such as the impairment of 
learning and memory, anxiolytic-like behaviors, alterations in 
sleep pattern, and tremors.[42,43] So it is speculated that changes 
in endogenous opioid levels and their effects on opioid gene 
expression in certain brain regions may underlie changes in 
pain perception and other possible pathological changes (such 
as pruritus) caused by obstructive jaundice.
However, Nelson et al reported that cholestasis-associated ant-
inociception may involve the local action of endogenous opioids 
(e.g., enkephalins synthesized in the skin) at sensory nerve end-
ings.[44] In addition, unlike isoflurane, altered sensitivity to remifen-
tanil in obstructive jaundice may not primarily occur through 
central mechanisms, as cholestatic mice demonstrated antinocicep-
tion to thermal and mechanical stimuli, which can be reversible 
by naloxone or naloxone methiodide, a naloxone derivative which 
does not cross the blood-brain-barrier, indicating an opioid antino-
ciceptive effect mediated outside of the central nervous system.[45]
Elevated β-endorphin levels in obstructive jaundice may have 
a role other than antinociception, such as being associated with 
cardiovascular disease, as β-endorphin can inhibit myocardial 
contractiles and promote capillary dilatation in a variety of 
pathologic processes.[46] However, fatigue and pruritus accom-
panying cholestasis can result from a central mechanism involv-
ing increased opioidergic neurotransmission.[47]
Although all opioid analgesics can cause biliary sphinc-
ter spasm and an increase in bile duct pressure, the adequate 
postoperative analgesia should be provided after the surgery. 
Anesthesiologists and surgeons could use a small dose of opi-
oid analgesics, while the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs should be avoided.
5. Selection of muscle relaxants for obstructive 
jaundice
For the choice of muscle relaxant in patients with obstructive 
jaundice, succinylcholine, a depolarizing muscle relaxant, is not 
recommended due to its potential to excite the vagus nerve, 
leading to bradycardia or ventricular arrhythmia. In addition, 
succinylcholine is hydrolyzed by butylcholinesterase (pseudo-
cholinesterase) in blood and liver, and its metabolism and excre-
tion are slowed down in the case of obstructive jaundice with 
impaired liver function, so more attention should be paid to 
the reduction of use, and it is advisable to prefer short-acting 
non-depolarizing muscle relaxants.[48,49]
At present, non-depolarizing muscle relaxants are widely 
used in clinic, among which atracurium and cisatracurium 
are the preferred muscle relaxants for jaundiced patients as 
their metabolism is independent of liver and kidney functions. 
Approximately 80% of these drugs are degraded via Hoffmann 
elimination, a very small number is broken down through ace-
tate metabolism, and the remaining 15% is excreted via the kid-
ney in a prototype form. There is no significant difference in the 
efficacy of these 2 muscle relaxants between genders and age 
groups, and repeated use does not lead to drug accumulation.[50] 
However, the intensity of cisatracurium is 4 times that of atra-
curium, whereas its metabolite laudanosine is only one-third at 
an clinical equivalent dose, with no dose-dependent effect of 
histamine release and cardiovascular adverse effect.[50,51] Thus, 
cisatracurium is advantageous for use in patients with obstruc-
tive jaundice.
Other types of non-depolarizing muscle relaxants, such as 
rocuronium bromide, are also widely used in clinical anesthe-
sia for its short onset time and intermediate duration of action. 
However, rocuronium is primarily metabolized by the liver, 
eliminated by the biliary tract, and 9% is excreted by the kidney 
in its prototype form,[52] so its use in patients with liver and bile 
diseases will be mixed with more complicated interfering factors. 
The study by Wang ZM et al showed that neuromuscular block-
ade of rocuronium was prolonged in patients with obstructive 
jaundice, while its onset time was not affected. Though the exact 
reason for the prolonged action time of rocuronium induced by 
obstructive jaundice is not completely clear, the impedance of 
rocuronium excretion may be the primary reason, probably due 
to bile duct obstruction and increased plasma unbound rocuro-
nium competing with free bilirubin for albumin binding.[53]
Considering that the drug-metabolizing enzyme system may 
be impaired in jaundiced patients with plasma clearance of 
rocuronium bromide significantly reduced, rocuronium should 
be used cautiously during perioperative period, including an 
appropriate extension of the interval for drug supplementation, 
strengthening intraoperative muscle relaxant monitoring, and 
recommending the use of muscle relaxant antagonists to reduce 
the incidence of pulmonary complications and postoperative 
residual neuromuscular block.[54,55] Among the commonly used 
muscle relaxant antagonists, Sugammadex[51,54] or anticholin-
esterase[55] are both recommended. However it is important to 
emphasize that neostigmine is a cholinergic drug, and therefore 
should be used with caution in jaundiced patients to prevent 
severe arrhythmias or cardiac arrest. As for sugammadex, it is 
more effective than neostigmine at reducing residual neuromus-
cular weakness, however whether obstructive iaundice affects 
its antagonistic potency or pharmacodynamic characteristics 
has not been reported so far.
6. Summary
In conclusion, the extensive and complex pathophysiological 
changes in patients with obstructive jaundice pose a major 
challenge for perioperative management. For anesthesiologists, 
the selection of appropriate anesthetics based on comprehen-
sive properative assessment and the fine adjustment of anes-
thetic dosage according to vigilant intraoperative monitoring, 
are essential to ensure the stability of anesthesia and minimize 
perioperative risks. Of course, this article only reviews the selec-
tion of anesthetic agents for obstructive jaundice, but in fact, 
the pathophysiological changes of obstructive jaundice associ-
ated with perioperative anesthesia management involve almost 
all vital organs, including alterations in blood biochemistry and 
metabolism, coagulation, infection, liver injury, renal dysfunc-
tion, cardiovascular instability, malnutrition, stress ulcer, bac-
terial translocation, immunosuppression and other potential 
complications, which may increase the mortality and morbid-
ity during perioperative period. Furthermore, variations in the 


5
Li et al.  •  Medicine (2025) 104:26
www.md-journal.com
severity or duration of jaundice can also lead to marked changes 
in the pharmacological properties of many anesthetic agents 
affected by obstructive jaundice. Therefore, a multidisciplinary 
approach is imperative for the comprehensive perioperative care 
of such patients, ensuring a collaborative effort to cope with 
the diverse challenges posed by obstructive jaundice at different 
stages and severity.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: Yunfei Cao.
Project administration: Yunfei Cao, Yue Long.
Supervision: Yunfei Cao.
Writing – original draft: Yi-Qing Li, Xuefei Zhou.
Writing – review & editing: Yunfei Cao, Yue Long.
References
	 [1]	 Liu J-J, Sun YM, Xu Y, Mei H-W, Guo W, Li Z-L. Pathophysiological 
consequences and treatment strategy of obstructive jaundice. World J 
Gastrointest Surg. 2023;15:1262–76.
	 [2]	 Wang L, Yu WF. Obstructive jaundice and perioperative management. 
Acta Anaesthesiol Taiwan. 2014;52:22–9.
	 [3]	 Feldman AG, Sokol RJ. Neonatal cholestasis: updates on diagnostics, 
therapeutics, and prevention. Neoreviews. 2021;22:e819–36.
	 [4]	 Rizzo A, Ricci AD, Frega G, et al. How to choose between percutaneous 
transhepatic and endoscopic biliary drainage in malignant obstructive 
jaundice: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. In Vivo. 
2020;34:1701–14.
	 [5]	 Zhu L, Yang Y, Cheng H, et al. The role of preoperative biliary drainage 
on postoperative outcome after pancreaticoduodenectomy in patients 
with obstructive jaundice. Gland Surg. 2023;12:593–608.
	 [6]	 Yang L-Q, Song J-C, Irwin MG, Song J-G, Sun Y-M, Yu W-F. A clin-
ical prospective comparison of anesthetics sensitivity and hemody-
namic effect among patients with or without obstructive jaundice. Acta 
Anaesthesiol Scand. 2010;54:871–7.
	 [7]	 Dilektasli E, Ozmen MM, Gundogdu E, Dizen H, Besler HT, Ozogul C. 
The effects of obstructive jaundice on the brain: an experimental study. 
Asian J Surg. 2016;39:155–63.
	 [8]	 Huang LT, Hsieh CS, Chou MH, et al. Obstructive jaundice in rats: 
cause of spatial memory deficits with recovery after biliary decompres-
sion. World J Surg. 2004;28:283–7.
	 [9]	 Song JG, Cao YF, Yang LQ, et al. Awakening concentration of desflu-
rane is decreased in patients with obstructive jaundice. Anesthesiology. 
2005;102:562–5.
	[10]	 Song JG, Cao YF, Sun YM, et al. Baroreflex sensitivity is impaired in 
patients with obstructive jaundice. Anesthesiology. 2009;111:561–5.
	[11]	 Chen S-Q, Ye H-R, Chen Y-J, Wang Y-W. MAC(EI) and MAC(awake) 
of sevoflurane in infants with obstructive jaundice. Paediatr Anaesth. 
2014;24:282–9.
	[12]	 Arenas YM, Izquierdo-Altarejos P, Martinez-García M, et al. 
Golexanolone improves fatigue, motor incoordination and gait and 
memory in rats with bile duct ligation. Liver Int. 2024;44:433–45.
	[13]	 Quinn M, McMillin M, Galindo C, Frampton G, Pae HY, DeMorrow S. 
Bile acids permeabilize the blood brain barrier after bile duct ligation in 
rats via Rac1‐dependent mechanisms. Dig Liver Dis. 2014;46:527–34.
	[14]	 McMillin M, Frampton G, Grant S, et al. Bile acid-mediated 
Sphingosine-1-Phosphate Receptor 2 signaling promotes neuroinflam-
mation during hepatic encephalopathy in mice. Front Cell Neurosci. 
2017;11:191.
	[15]	 McMillin M, Frampton G, Quinn M, et al. Bile acid signaling is 
involved in the neurological decline in a murine model of acute liver 
failure. Am J Pathol. 2016;186:312–23.
	[16]	 Eger EI 2nd, Koblin DD, Harris RA, et al. Hypothesis: inhaled anesthet-
ics produce immobility and amnesia by differentmechanisms at differ-
ent sites. Anesth Analg. 1997;84:915–8.
	[17]	 Furukawa Y. Histological changes in the brain due to experimental 
obstructive jaundice. Nippon Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1991;92:37–45.
	[18]	 Hosseini N, Nasehi M, Radahmadi M, Zarrindast M-R. Effects of CA1 
glutamatergic systems upon memory impairments in cholestatic rats. 
Behav Brain Res. 2013;256:636–45.
	[19]	 Burak KW, Le T, Swain MG. Increased midbrain 5-HT1A receptor num-
ber and responsiveness in cholestatic rats. Brain Res. 2001;892:376–9.
	[20]	 Song JC, Zhang MZ, Lu ZJ, et al. The effects of obstructive jaundice on 
the pharmacodynamics of propofol: does the sensitivity of intravenous 
anesthetics change among icteric patients? Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 
2009;53:1329–35.
	[21]	 Song JC, Sun YM, Zhang MZ, Yang LQ, Tao TZ, Yu WF. The eto-
midate requirement is decreased in patients with obstructive jaundice. 
Anesth Analg. 2011;113:1028–32.
	[22]	 Forman SA. Clinical and molecular pharmacology of etomidate. 
Anesthesiology. 2011;114:695–707.
	[23]	 Sahinovic MM, Struys MMRF, Absalom AR. Clinical pharmaco-
kinetics and pharmacodynamics of propofol. Clin Pharmacokinet. 
2018;57:1539–58.
	[24]	 Shi HB, Kakazu Y, Shibata S, Matsumoto N, Nakagawa T, Komune S. 
Bilirubin potentiates inhibitory synaptic transmission in lateral supe-
rior olive neurons of the rat. Neurosci Res. 2006;55:161–70.
	[25]	 Song JC, Meng XY, Yang H, et al. Obstructive jaundice does not change 
the population pharmacokinetics of etomidate in patients who under-
went bile duct surgery. Curr Drug Deliv. 2022;19:635–41.
	[26]	 Song JC, Gao H, Qiu HB, et al. The pharmacokinetics of dexmedeto-
midine in patients with obstructive jaundice: a clinical trial. PLoS One. 
2018;13:e0207427.
	[27]	 Fisher MB, Paine MF, Strelevitz TJ, Wrighton SA. The role of hepatic 
and extrahepatic UDP-glucuronosyltransferases in human drug metab-
olism. Drug Metab Rev. 2001;33:273–97.
	[28]	 Barbier O, Turgeon D, Girard C, et al. 3′-azido-3′-deoxythimidine 
(AZT) is glucuronidated by human UDP-glucuronosyl transferase 2B7 
(UGT2B7). Drug Metab Dispos. 2000;28:497–502.
	[29]	 Tanaka S, Kinowaki M, Maeda Y, et al. Species difference in cholesterol 
7alpha-hydroxylase expression of rabbit and rat liver microsomes after 
bile duct ligation. J Surg Res. 2004;119:36–40.
	[30]	 Yang LQ, Li SJ, Cao YF, et al. Different alterations of cytochrome P450 
3A4 isoform and its gene expression in livers of patients with chronic 
liver diseases. World J Gastroenterol. 2003;9:359–63.
	[31]	 Fukushima S, Okuno H, Shibatani N, Nakahashi Y, Seki T, Okazaki 
K. Effect of biliary obstruction and internal biliary drainage on 
hepatic cytochrome P450 isozymes in rats. World J Gastroenterol. 
2008;14:2556–60.
	[32]	 Ren HM, Yang LQ, Liu ZQ, et al. In vivo and ex vivo effects of propo-
fol on myocardial performance in rats with obstructive jaundice. BMC 
Gastroenterol. 2011;11:144.
	[33]	 Xia Z, Huang Z, Ansley DM. Large-dose propofol during cardiopul-
monary bypass decreases biochemical markers of myocardial injury in 
coronary surgery patients: a comparison with isoflurane. Anesth Analg. 
2006;103:527–32.
	[34]	 McDonagh A. Obstructive jaundice, bilirubin and propofol pharma-
codynamics. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2010;54:1152; author reply 
1152.
	[35]	 Song JC, Lu ZJ, Jiao YF, et al. Etomidate anesthesia during ERCP 
caused More stable haemodynamic responses compared with propofol: 
a randomized clinical trial. Int J Med Sci. 2015;12:559–65.
	[36]	 Hatipoglu S, Yildiz H, Bulbuloglu E, et al. Protective effects of intra-
venous anesthetics on kidney tissue in obstructive jaundice. World J 
Gastroenterol. 2014;20:3320–6.
	[37]	 Shi L, Guo C, Xie Y, Liu Y, Wu F. Dexmedetomidine attenuates lung 
injury in obstructive jaundice rats through PI3K/Akt/HIF-1α signaling 
pathway. Arch Med Res. 2019;50:233–40.
	[38]	 Swain MG, Rothman RB, Xu H, Vergalla J, Bergasa NV, Jones EA. 
Endogenous opioids accumulate in plasma in a rat model of acute 
cholestasis. Gastroenterology. 1992;103:630–5.
	[39]	 Tao K, Zhu J, Wei K, et al. Cannabinoid receptor-2 activation in kera-
tinocytes contributes to elevated peripheral β-endorphin levels in 
patients with obstructive jaundice. Anesth Analg. 2021;133:251–62.
	[40]	 Tao KM, Tao Y, Chen CY, et al. Proteinase-activated receptor 1 contrib-
uted to up-regulation of enkephalin in keratinocytes of patients with 
obstructive jaundice. Anesthesiology. 2014;121:127–39.
	[41]	 Ahmadi S, Karami Z, Mohammadian A, Khosrobakhsh F, Rostamzadeh 
J. Cholestasis induced antinociception and decreased gene expression 
of MOR1 in rat brain. Neuroscience. 2015;284:78–86.
	[42]	 Jones EA, Dekker LR. Florid opioid withdrawal-like reaction pre-
cipitated by naltrexone in a patient with chronic cholestasis. 
Gastroenterology. 2000;118:431–2.
	[43]	 Shawcross DL, Jalan R. Delayed opioid withdrawal-like reaction in pri-
mary biliary cirrhosis following naloxone therapy. Gastroenterology. 
2001;121:743–4.
	[44]	 Nelson L, Vergnolle N, D’Mello C, Chapman K, Le T, Swain MG. 
Endogenous opioid-mediated antinociception in cholestatic mice is 
peripherally, not centrally, mediated. J Hepatol. 2006;44:1141–9.
	[45]	 Düll MM, Wolf K, Vetter M, Dietrich P, Neurath MF, Kremer AE. 
Endogenous opioid levels do not correlate with itch intensity and 


6
Li et al.  •  Medicine (2025) 104:26
Medicine
therapeutic interventions in hepatic pruritus. Front Med (Lausanne). 
2021;8:641163.
	[46]	 Zarrindast MR, Hoseindoost S, Nasehi M. Possible interaction between 
opioidergic and cholinergic systems of CA1 in cholestasis-induced 
amnesia in mice. Behav Brain Res. 2012;228:116–24.
	[47]	 Reza Zarrindast M, Eslimi Esfahani D, Oryan S, Nasehi M, Torabi 
Nami M. Effects of dopamine receptor agonist and antagonists on 
cholestasis-induced anxiolytic-like behaviors in rats. Eur J Pharmacol. 
2013;702:25–31.
	[48]	 McCourt KC, Salmela L, Mirakhur RK, et al. Comparison of rocuro-
nium and suxamethonium for use during rapid sequence induction of 
anaesthesia. Anaesthesia. 1998;53:867–71.
	[49]	 Khuenl-Brady K, Castagnoli KP, Canfell PC, Caldwell JE, Agoston S, 
Miller RD. The neuromuscular blocking effects and pharmacokinetics of 
ORG 9426 and ORG 9616 in the cat. Anesthesiology. 1990;72:669–74.
	[50]	 Adamus M, Gabrhelik T, Marek O. Influence of gender on the course 
of neuromuscular block following a single bolus dose of cisatracurium 
or rocuronium. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2008;25:589–95.
	[51]	 Puhringer FK, Rex C, Sielenkamper AW, et al. Reversal of profound, 
high-dose rocuronium-induced neuromuscular blockade by sugamma-
dex at two different time points: an international, multicenter, random-
ized, dose-finding, safety assessor-blinded, phase II trial. Anesthesiology. 
2008;109:188–97.
	[52]	 Arain SR, Kern S, Ficke DJ, Ebert TJ. Variability of duration of action 
of neuromuscular-blocking drugs in elderly patients. Acta Anaesthesiol 
Scand. 2005;49:312–5.
	[53]	 Wang Z-M, Zhang P, Lin M-J, Tan B, Qiu H-B, Yu W-F. Influence of 
obstructive jaundice on pharmacodynamics of rocuronium. PLoS One. 
2013;8:e78052.
	[54]	 Baillard C, Clec’h C, Catineau J, et al. Postoperative residual 
neuromuscular block: a survey of management. Br J Anaesth. 
2005;95:622–6.
	[55]	 Huang J, Gao X, Wang M, et al. Prophylactic administration with 
methylene blue improves hemodynamic stabilization during obstruc-
tive jaundice-related diseases’ operation: a blinded randomized con-
trolled trial. J Gastrointest Surg. 2023;27:1837–45.
