Received:  2024.07.24
Accepted:  2024.08.23
Available online:  2024.10.15
Published:  2024.11.19
  6013   
  2   
  —   
  51
Optimizing Anesthetic Management 
for Laparoscopic Surgery: A Comprehensive 
Review
	
ABCDEFG  1-3	 Paweł Radkowski 
	
ABCDEF  4	 Hubert Oniszczuk 
	
BCDEF  1	 Justyna Opolska 
	
BCDEF  1	 Aleksandra Kłosińska 
	
BEF  1	 Tariq Dabdoub 
	
AE  1,2	 Dariusz Onichimowski 
	
Corresponding Author:	
Hubert Oniszczuk, e-mil: klasa06@gmail.com
	
Financial support:	
Funded by the Minister of Science under the Regional Initiative of Excellence Program
	
Conflict of interest:	
None declared
	
	
Laparoscopy, as the most frequently chosen surgical technique in the world, carries specific complications and 
distinctions in anesthetic management. Complications of laparoscopy, particularly perceptible as disorders of 
the physiology of the cardiovascular, respiratory, and nervous systems, are caused by the specific technical con­
ditions required for this type of operation. To facilitate surgical access and to clarify the surgical field, it is nec­
essary to create a splenic emphysema, consisting of filling the peritoneal cavity with carbon dioxide (CO2). This 
results in an increase in intra-abdominal pressure (IAP) and increased diffusion of CO2 into the blood, causing 
a state of hypercarbia. The impact of these disturbances is of great importance in the pathological function­
ing of the above-mentioned organ systems. The anesthetist, in addition to the need to induce a state of gen­
eral anesthesia, must be aware of and understand the pathological impact of increased intracranial pressure 
(ICP) and hypercarbia to adjust patient monitoring accordingly and implement appropriate treatment targeting 
the specific complications occurring during laparoscopy. Complications and contraindications important from 
the anesthetist’s point of view are also described. The 51 articles and reference texts were used for this pur­
pose, which, combined with the authors’ knowledge and experience, is intended to be a valuable resource for 
use by anesthesiology staff. This article aims to explain the effects of laparoscopy on human physiology and to 
compare and contrast methods of airway management, mechanical ventilation, the type of muscle relaxation 
used, and postoperative management in patients undergoing laparoscopic surgery.
	
Keywords:	
Anesthesiology • Cardiovascular System • Central Nervous System • Laparoscopy • 
Pneumoperitoneum • Ventilation
	
Full-text PDF:	
https://www.medscimonit.com/abstract/index/idArt/945951
Authors’ Contribution: 
Study Design  A
 Data Collection  B
 Statistical Analysis  C
Data Interpretation  D
 Manuscript Preparation  E
 Literature Search  F
Funds Collection  G
1 Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, Faculty of Medicine, Collegium 
Medicum University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn, Olsztyn, Poland
2 Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care, Regional Specialist Hospital 
in Olsztyn, Olsztyn, Poland
3 Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care, Hospital zum Heiligen 
Geist in Fritzlar, Fritzlar, Germany
4 Faculty of Medicine, Medical University of Białystok, Białystok, Poland
e-ISSN 1643-3750
© Med Sci Monit, 2024; 30: e945951
DOI: 10.12659/MSM.945951
Publisher’s note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated 
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be 
made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher
e945951-1
Indexed in:  [Current Contents/Clinical Medicine]  [SCI Expanded]  [ISI Alerting System]   
[ISI Journals Master List]  [Index Medicus/MEDLINE]  [EMBASE/Excerpta Medica]   
[Chemical Abstracts/CAS]
REVIEW ARTICLES
This work is licensed under Creative Common Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)


Introduction
The laparoscopic technique deserves special attention, as it is 
currently the most frequently used technique in general surgery 
in the world. It owes its advantage over laparotomy to the fact 
that it is a minimally invasive technique. This manifests itself 
in fewer complications such as infections, blood loss, postop­
erative pain, and adhesion formation. Because of this, it allows 
earlier mobility and a shorter hospital stay for patients under­
going surgery while consuming less analgesics. It may addi­
tionally be used as a diagnostic procedure only [1]. However, 
it is not a technique without weaknesses. Special skills are re­
quired of the surgeon as well as specific anesthetic manage­
ment. It also carries many complications associated with both 
mechanical trauma and the creation of a specific environment 
in the human body, such as peritoneal emphysema. Its produc­
tion by infusing CO2 into the peritoneal cavity will result in a 
state of increased intra-abdominal pressure (IAP) and hyper­
carbia. Such a condition generates characteristic disturbances 
in the homeostasis of the human body, particularly affecting 
the functioning of the cardiovascular, respiratory, and nervous 
systems (both central and peripheral). An adequate and thor­
ough understanding of the details of laparoscopic surgery, in­
cluding the specific effects of peritoneal emphysema on hu­
man physiology, determines safe anesthesia and perioperative 
care. In addition, the anesthesiology team must be able to rap­
idly recognize and intervene in typical situations that are spe­
cific complications of laparoscopy. The essence of this article 
is to present the complications and the contraindications to 
laparoscopic surgery, relevant from the anesthetist’s point of 
view. In addition, it presents the management of general an­
esthesia, focusing on the method of airway management, the 
type of mechanical ventilation, and the pattern of use of mus­
cle relaxants. It also describes the perioperative management 
of pain and antiemetic therapy. For this article, we searched 
the available literature and selected 51 articles published be­
tween 1992 and 2024. Articles that were research papers con­
sidered only adult populations, so the perioperative manage­
ment described in this article does not apply to the pediatric 
population. Due to the ongoing development of specific thera­
peutic approaches for selected complications, we have includ­
ed studies that are in the preclinical research stages to illus­
trate potential directions in laparoscopy and the treatment of 
complications. Such a statement of recognized medical norms 
for the management of patients undergoing laparoscopy and 
new potential directions are an undoubted advantage of this 
article. Based on the above-mentioned available literature as 
well as the authors’ knowledge and clinical experience, we 
have tried to create an article to better understand the nature 
of complications of laparoscopic surgery and their therapeutic 
options as well as to consider options in perioperative man­
agement. Because of this, the undoubted value of this article 
is the combination of the explanation of the pathophysiology 
of the created peritoneal emphysema and the statement of 
methods of both anesthesia and perioperative management. 
That will enable understanding the specifics of such operations 
from the point of view of the anesthesiology staff.
Pathophysiology of Pneumoperitoneum
Pneumoperitoneum is an abnormal state affecting the physi­
ology of all systems of the human body. These effects are pri­
marily related to changes in intra-abdominal pressure and 
their subsequent effects on respiratory mechanics and gas 
exchange, as well as the chemical properties of CO2 diffusing 
into the blood, causing a hypercarbia state. As the volume of 
gas accumulates within the peritoneal cavity, it can cause ir­
ritation and inflammation of the peritoneal lining, leading to 
general abdominal symptoms such as abdominal distension, 
tenderness, rigidity, and pain.
The following paragraphs describe the disruption to the phys­
iology of the 3 main systems – cardiovascular, respiratory, and 
nervous system (both central and peripheral) – that carbon di­
oxide-induced peritoneal emphysema causes.
Effects of Peritoneal Emphysema on 
the Cardiovascular System and Visceral 
Circulation
The effects of peritoneal emphysema on the various com­
ponents of cardiovascular hemodynamics are well described 
in the literature and appear as interacting compartments. 
Injection of CO2 into the peritoneal cavity causes an increase 
in IAP, creating mechanical compression of veins and arteries. 
Compression of large veins, including the inferior vena cava, 
causes an increase in central venous pressure (CVP) while re­
ducing venous return, which reduces cardiac preload. In con­
trast, compression of the abdominal arterial vessels increases 
systemic vascular resistance (SVR) manifested as an increase 
in mean arterial pressure (MAP). Elevated SVR and MAP re­
sults in an increase in cardiac afterload. These changes in car­
diac preload and afterload decrease cardiac output (CO) and 
cardiac index (CI), leading to impaired organ perfusion [2,3]. 
In addition to mechanical compression, the chemical nature 
of CO2 itself, causing hypercarbia, has an impact on the car­
diovascular system. Hypercarbia induces a number of physio­
logically relevant changes, including a decrease in SVR, while 
pulmonary vascular resistance increases, raises blood pH, and 
impairs hemoglobin affinity impairing oxygen transport. It also 
has a depressive effect on the myocardium, promoting ischemia 
or arrhythmic incidents [2,4]. For this reason, it is crucial from 
the anesthetist’s point of view to carefully monitor capnia and 
maintain its value according to the patient’s clinical picture.
e945951-2
Indexed in:  [Current Contents/Clinical Medicine]  [SCI Expanded]  [ISI Alerting System]   
[ISI Journals Master List]  [Index Medicus/MEDLINE]  [EMBASE/Excerpta Medica]   
[Chemical Abstracts/CAS]
REVIEW ARTICLES
This work is licensed under Creative Common Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)
Radkowski P. et al: 
Anesthetic management for laparoscopic surgery
© Med Sci Monit, 2024; 30: e945951


It should be recalled that an increase in IAP also alters heart 
rate (HR) function, causing bradycardia and tachyarrhythmia, 
as described in more detail in the paragraph on changes in 
the nervous system.
The cardiovascular changes described above result in impaired 
visceral perfusion. Abnormalities in visceral microcirculation 
and inadequate tissue oxygenation have clinical implications. 
During laparoscopic surgery, reduced renal perfusion results 
in a decrease in glomerular filtration rate (GFR), leading to no­
ticeable oliguria [2-4].
Adequate filling of the vascular bed is an effective treatment 
to reduce cardiac output and impaired organ perfusion [5,6]. 
The most beneficial effect in improving hemodynamic parame­
ters and visceral flow was achieved by increasing the vascular 
volume with colloid infusion, while pharmacological vasodila­
tation and sympathetic blockade proved ineffective.
In the context of emphysema-induced organ ischemia, it is 
important to be aware of the phenomenon of reperfusion in­
jury. After deflagration, reactive oxygen species (ROS) are re­
leased into the blood and have tissue-damaging properties. 
The balance between the antioxidant and oxidant systems is 
disrupted, leading to oxidative stress. The protective effect 
of the a2-agonist dexmedetomidine against organ damage 
caused by ischemia and reperfusion has been discovered. In 
view of these properties, this anesthetic has been proposed 
as a drug to prevent reperfusion damage in patients under­
going laparoscopic surgery [7]. Similarly, the protective prop­
erties of glycine against post-reperfusion liver damage have 
been described [8].
The vascular complication of peritoneal emphysema – CO2 em­
bolism – should also be borne in mind. This can lead to clin­
ical complications such as pulmonary edema, shock, stroke, 
or even cardiac arrest. It has been shown that lower intra-ab­
dominal pressure can have a protective effect. In addition, it is 
recommended to use transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) 
to detect potential gas embolism during procedures that in­
crease their risk [9]. In the event of an embolism, gas admin­
istration must be stopped immediately, the patient should be 
positioned lying on the left side, and ventilation with 100% 
oxygen started [2].
Respiratory Effects
CO2-induced peritoneal emphysema leads to respiratory dys­
function. CO2 entering the blood causes hypercarbia, increas­
ing pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) through vasoconstric­
tion [2]. Therefore, to maintain normal blood capnia, excess CO2 
must be removed from the patient’s blood by increasing the 
minute ventilation on the ventilator [10]. When, despite this 
treatment, the end-expiratory CO2 (EtCO2) concentration con­
tinues to rise after 30 minutes, one of the surgical complica­
tions – subcutaneous emphysema – should be considered [2].
An undeniably important component of ventilation and gas 
exchange impairment is direct compression and disruption of 
chest mechanics through increased IAP. The diaphragm then 
moves in a cephalad direction, compressing the lung paren­
chyma; this is further increased when the patient is placed in 
the Trendelenburg position. Compression of the lung paren­
chyma leads to areas of atelectasis, resulting in a reduction in 
the volume of ventilated lung tissue. In addition, a decrease 
in lung compliance, impairment of chest elasticity, and an in­
crease in airway pressure were observed. The above chang­
es result in a lower functional residual capacity (FRC) and an 
impaired ventilation-to-perfusion ratio, leading to further hy­
poxemia [2,11,12].
It has been suggested that a method of ventilation called the 
“open lung” method is effective in eliminating atelectatic ar­
eas, thereby improving gas exchange and respiratory me­
chanics. This consists of a recruitment maneuver (RM), such 
as application of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) 
at 40 cmH2O for 40 seconds [11], which results in aeration of 
atelectatic alveoli. The next step is the application of positive 
end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) at 5 to 10 cmH2O, depending 
on the study, to keep the alveoli continuously open. In addition, 
using PEEP alone without RM improves aeration and breathing 
mechanics but does not improve blood oxygenation [11,12].
Neurological Effects
Neurological effects affect both the central nervous system 
(CNS) and the peripheral nervous system, as well as the au­
tonomic and somatic systems. It is directly caused by nerve 
compression and indirectly by impaired venous outflow from 
the CNS; hypercarbia modulating the vascular resistance of 
the cerebral circulation is also important.
The impact of peritoneal emphysema on the CNS is manifest­
ed by changes in intracranial pressure (ICP) and cerebral per­
fusion pressure (CPP).
An increase in intra-peritoneal pressure results in an increase 
in ICP. Several interacting components contribute to this ef­
fect, such as compression of the inferior vena cava obstruct­
ing venous blood outflow from the head, including the CNS, 
vasodilatation of the cerebral circulation vessels due to reten­
tion of CO2 used to smother emphysema, and compression of 
the lumbar venous plexus. Patients with head trauma causing 
an increase in ICP are particularly at risk [13]. In a randomized 
e945951-3
Indexed in:  [Current Contents/Clinical Medicine]  [SCI Expanded]  [ISI Alerting System]   
[ISI Journals Master List]  [Index Medicus/MEDLINE]  [EMBASE/Excerpta Medica]   
[Chemical Abstracts/CAS]
REVIEW ARTICLES
This work is licensed under Creative Common Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)
Radkowski P. et al: 
Anesthetic management for laparoscopic surgery
© Med Sci Monit, 2024; 30: e945951


controlled trial [14], high-pressure (14 mmHg) emphysema in­
creased ICP in 20 out of 51 patients studied, while low-pres­
sure (8 mmHg) emphysema increased ICP in only 7 out of 50 
patients. Separate factors, such as increased intracranial pres­
sure and the use of the steep Trendelenburg position, have 
been shown to contribute to increased intracranial pressure 
by impairing venous outflow. However, the use of PEEP=8 cm­
H2O (with ventilation of 8 ml/kg of ideal body weight) did not 
exacerbate the further increase in ICP induced by emphysema 
(insufflation pressure 15 mmHg) and the Trendelenburg posi­
tion with a slope of 35° [15]. As volume and thus intracranial 
pressure increases, CPP decreases. The decrease in cerebral 
perfusion is moreover influenced by the decrease in cardiac 
index induced by emphysema [16]. In anesthesia, it is crucial 
to maintain normocapnia by adequately adjusting the respi­
ratory rate. This will stabilize intracranial homeostasis, which 
may prevent long-term significant neurological problems [17].
The impact on the autonomic nervous system has not been ex­
plicitly investigated. The physiological stress response induced 
by pneumoperitoneum can affect the autonomic nervous sys­
tem, leading to changes in sympathetic and parasympathet­
ic activity. This can result in alterations in HR, blood pressure 
(BP), and SVR, potentially affecting overall systemic hemody­
namics. Clinical studies [18-20] have shown that pneumoperi­
toneum results in a predominance of sympathetic nervous sys­
tem tone, as measured by an increase in heart rate variability 
(HRV). Interestingly, emphysema induced by a lower pressure 
(7 mmHg), results in significantly reduced sympathetic acti­
vation than standard-pressure emphysema (12 mmHg) [18], 
and this can increase risk of ventricular arrhythmias among 
patients with cardiac diseases [19].
Blowing CO2 into the abdominal cavity can increase vagus 
nerve tension, resulting in bradyarrhythmias, with the possi­
bility of asystole [2]. A retrospective cohort study [21] found 
that bradycardia is a common complication of laparoscopic sur­
gery and is managed by stopping gas insufflation, emptying 
the abdominal cavity, and administration of atropine. Careful 
monitoring of the patient and sometimes the inclusion of sup­
portive treatment is essential [22].
The increased intra-abdominal pressure can compress periph­
eral sensory nerves within the abdominal wall, leading to sen­
sations of discomfort, pain, or referred pain that may be per­
ceived in other regions of the body. Interestingly, it has been 
reported that 19 out of 90 patients operated on laparoscop­
ically experienced postoperative shoulder-tip pain, especial­
ly on the right side. This is further explained by the irritating 
effect of CO2 on the diaphragm, overstretching of its muscle 
fibers, or stretching of the intra-abdominal cavity [23]. Some 
of these patients are very likely to require additional postop­
erative pain therapy.
It is essential to monitor neurological parameters, especially 
in patients with pre-existing neurological conditions or inju­
ries, to ensure optimal neurological function and prevent any 
adverse neurological events during and after surgical proce­
dures involving pneumoperitoneum. Such patients are espe­
cially susceptible to ICP increases; in such circumstances, di­
agnosis by transcranial Doppler (TCD) is recommended [17].
Contraindications for Laparoscopic Operation
The risks associated with laparoscopic surgery can be catego­
rized as patient-specific, surgical, positional, or those arising 
from the altered physiology due to the creation of pneumo­
peritoneum. Laparoscopic surgery should never be considered 
“routine” or “low risk,” as complications tend to be more in­
sidious compared to traditional open techniques [24].
Laparoscopic surgery has traditionally been contraindicated in 
patients experiencing hemodynamic shock, acute intestinal ob­
struction (due to the risk of perforation from dilated bowel loops), 
and increased ICP. Relative contraindications include cardiac or 
respiratory failure, as the creation of pneumoperitoneum can 
increase myocardial workload and oxygen demand, potentially 
leading to myocardial infarction, and can also cause respiratory 
acidosis. Pregnancy is another relative contraindication, largely 
due to the reduced intra-abdominal space and other consider­
ations [25,26]. In the first trimester, laparoscopic surgery is con­
traindicated because of the risk of teratogenicity from anesthet­
ics. In the third trimester, the risk of premature delivery makes 
the procedure inadvisable. The second trimester (13-26 weeks) 
is relatively safer for laparoscopic surgery, although some stud­
ies indicate a higher risk of fetal loss associated with laparo­
scopic appendectomy compared to open surgery [24]. The re­
maining risks include infections at port sites, adhesions from 
previous abdominal surgeries, and diagnosed abdominal aor­
tic aneurysm. However, the risk to the individual patient must 
be balanced between the risk of complications due to the po­
sition, duration, degree of CO2 absorption, and physiological ef­
fects of pneumoperitoneum for a particular laparoscopic proce­
dure, versus the shortened postoperative recovery time, which 
may outweigh the increased intraoperative risk. Generally ac­
cepted contraindications include pre-existing raised intracrani­
al pressure, severe uncorrected hypovolemia, and patients with 
known right-to-left cardiac shunts or a patent foramen ovale [27].
Perioperative Management
Airway Management
The most common device used for airway management and ven­
tilation is the endotracheal tube (ETT), which is considered the 
e945951-4
Indexed in:  [Current Contents/Clinical Medicine]  [SCI Expanded]  [ISI Alerting System]   
[ISI Journals Master List]  [Index Medicus/MEDLINE]  [EMBASE/Excerpta Medica]   
[Chemical Abstracts/CAS]
REVIEW ARTICLES
This work is licensed under Creative Common Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)
Radkowski P. et al: 
Anesthetic management for laparoscopic surgery
© Med Sci Monit, 2024; 30: e945951


criterion standard for laparoscopic surgery, but it is relatively in­
vasive. In recent years, less invasive supraglottic airway devices 
(SAD) such as the laryngeal mask airway (LMA) or i-gel have been 
developed. The use of LMAs in surgeries is increasing, but there 
are some concerns about SAD, mainly related to regurgitation and 
risk of pulmonary regurgitation or inadequate ventilation [28,29].
Yilmaz et al [28] compared the applicability and differences 
between LMAs (LMA Protector) and EETs in patients under­
going laparoscopic cholecystectomy. In addition to the easier 
placement of LMAs relative to the intubation procedure, they 
caused less postoperative damage to the larynx and trachea, 
resulting in less postoperative soreness. They have a better 
hemodynamic profile, as evidenced by higher HR values after 
device insertion and emphysema creation and an increase in 
MAP after extubation when ETTs are used, which is explained 
by greater adrenergic stimulation. Importantly, use of this type 
of mask did not increase the risk of barotrauma and leakage, 
as peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) values were comparable to 
those of endotracheal intubation, and mean oropharyngeal 
leak pressure (OLP) values were above 30 mmHg.
Chih-Jun Lai et al [29] established the high effectiveness of i-gel 
masks during laparoscopic gynecological surgery in the inverted 
Trendelenburg position. The advantage of i-gel devices over con­
ventional endotracheal intubation was lower airway resistance 
and less postoperative pain in the throat area. Furthermore, sim­
ilar ventilation efficiency and no signs of aspiration were dem­
onstrated as with ETTs. The above studies suggest that in many 
cases of laparoscopic surgery, SADs can be as effective an alter­
native as ETTs, providing greater postoperative patient comfort.
However, the use of LMAs has limitations. One study recom­
mends using LMAs instead of ETTs for laparoscopic cholecys­
tectomies only if certain criteria are met: patients classified 
as ASA 1-3, scheduled for elective laparoscopic surgery, non-
obese (body mass index – BMI <30 kg/m2), and with pneumo­
peritoneum pressure lower than 13 mmHg. Additionally, the 
LMA used should have a drain channel, and performing a pro­
phylactic routine gastric aspiration may help minimize the risk 
of regurgitation and ensure proper exposure of the surgical 
field. Patients who do not meet these criteria will likely bene­
fit more from using an ETT rather than an LMA [30].
Ventilation Pressure-Controlled or 
Volume-Controlled
The most common method used in surgeries is volume-con­
trolled ventilation (VCV) [31]. In laparoscopic operations, com­
paring VCV and pressure-controlled ventilation (PCV) reveals 
key differences in respiratory management. PCV often provides 
better intraoperative oxygenation due to improved alveolar 
recruitment. However, studies indicated no significant differ­
ence between PCV and VCV in preventing postoperative pul­
monary atelectasis. Research involving morbidly obese pa­
tients undergoing laparoscopic gastric sleeve surgery shows 
that PCV results in higher intraoperative oxygen levels: patri­
al pressure of oxygen and oxygen saturation of arterial blood 
(PaO2 and SaO2, respectively) than VCV, but both methods yield 
similar outcomes for postoperative oxygenation and atelecta­
sis, a complication of intra-abdominal emphysema. Therefore, 
the choice between PCV and VCV should consider intraopera­
tive benefits and patient-specific factors, as both techniques 
are effective in preventing postoperative complications [32].
In laparoscopic surgeries, both VCV and PCV appear equal­
ly suitable for most healthy patients without comorbidities. 
However, in certain patient populations, PCV has shown ad­
vantages. The parameters used to compare the methods in­
clude hemodynamic and respiratory factors.
In elderly patients undergoing laparoscopic interventions on bile 
ducts with LMA, PCV provided ventilation with lower peak inspi­
ratory pressure and greater dynamic compliance [33]. PCV mode 
has further been proven to provide better oxygenation in patients 
undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy [34]. Furthermore, for 
patients undergoing laparoscopic surgery in Trendelenburg po­
sition, PCV was shown to provide ventilation with lower peak 
inspiratory pressure and greater dynamic compliance [35].
Use of Muscle Relaxants for Laparoscopy
The use of muscle relaxation aims to provide better conditions to 
surgeons by minimizing sudden movements and increasing intra-
abdominal space. The most common approach is to use a mod­
erate or standard neuromuscular block (1 dose of induction mus­
cle relaxants). However, the alternate approach is the use of deep 
neuromuscular blockade, which has shown some advantages. The 
EURO-RELAX TRIAL study [36] demonstrated that deep neuromus­
cular blockade (NMB) provides better surgical conditions com­
pared to standard NMB, which is particularly crucial in complex 
laparoscopic procedures. Standard NMB is sufficient for less com­
plex procedures such as laparoscopic cholecystectomy, appendec­
tomy, and simple diagnostic procedures. In contrast, deep NMB 
is recommended for more complex procedures, including cancer 
surgery, bariatric surgery, laparoscopic reconstructions, and ro­
botic procedures. The use of deep NMB minimizes sudden peri­
operative movements, improving conditions for surgeons and re­
ducing the risk of tissue injury. While deep NMB can significantly 
enhance operative conditions during complex laparoscopic proce­
dures, it also necessitates more extensive monitoring and careful 
management of the neuromuscular blockade. Furthermore, us­
ing deep neuromuscular blockade allows for the maintenance of 
intra-abdominal pressure at a lower level compared to standard 
e945951-5
Indexed in:  [Current Contents/Clinical Medicine]  [SCI Expanded]  [ISI Alerting System]   
[ISI Journals Master List]  [Index Medicus/MEDLINE]  [EMBASE/Excerpta Medica]   
[Chemical Abstracts/CAS]
REVIEW ARTICLES
This work is licensed under Creative Common Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)
Radkowski P. et al: 
Anesthetic management for laparoscopic surgery
© Med Sci Monit, 2024; 30: e945951


neuromuscular blockade. This reduction in intra-abdominal pres­
sure can decrease the risk of organ damage associated with high 
pressures [10]. The depth of neuromuscular blockage is typically 
measured through stimulation of the ulnar nerve and assessing 
the muscular response. Two patterns of stimulation are typically 
used – train-of-four (TOF) and post-tetanic count simulation (PTC). 
“Classically”, the standard neuromuscular blockade has been a 
TOF of 1-2. However, recent studies show that for deep neuro­
muscular blockade, a TOF target of 0 is ideal along with a PTC of 
less than 5 [37]. Another systematic review had 3 main findings. 
First, there is strong evidence (recommendation grade A) that the 
use of deep NMB compared with moderate NMB optimizes sur­
gical conditions during laparoscopic cholecystectomy, hysterecto­
my, and nephrectomy/prostatectomy. Although deep NMB slightly 
improves surgical conditions during laparoscopic cholecystectomy 
performed with low-pressure pneumoperitoneum (8 mmHg), en­
suring acceptable conditions may require an increase in intra-ab­
dominal pressure in up to half of patients, regardless of the lev­
el of NMB. Second, moderate NMB improves surgical conditions 
in some cases during radical retropubic prostatectomy, although 
good to excellent conditions can be achieved even without NMB. 
Third, deep NMB (PTC 0-2) is recommended for laparoscopic cho­
lecystectomy, nephrectomy, and prostatectomy to improve surgi­
cal conditions, while there is insufficient evidence to determine 
the optimal level of NMB for laparotomy [38].
Postoperative Management
After the surgery, patients usually experience maximal pain 
in the first 2 hours. It is necessary to provide them with ap­
propriate analgesia, oxygen, and (if needed) antiemetics. 
Postoperative care following laparoscopic surgery is crucial 
for ensuring a smooth recovery and minimizing complications. 
Effective management of postoperative pain is a primary fo­
cus, as pain can significantly impact patient recovery and sat­
isfaction; therefore, various strategies in pain prevention and 
treatment are employed [39].
Additionally, maintaining optimal intra-abdominal pressure 
during surgery is essential to prevent postoperative complica­
tions. Lower intra-abdominal pressure achieved through deep 
neuromuscular blockade has been associated with a reduced 
risk of organ damage, highlighting the importance of appro­
priate anesthetic and pressure management strategies [40].
Enhanced Eecovery After Surgery (ERAS) 
Protocol in Laparoscopic Operations
The ERAS protocol is becoming more widely and readily used 
in surgery and perioperative care of patients. It combines a 
complex of preoperative, perioperative, and postoperative 
procedures that aim to reduce postoperative discomfort and 
shorten the length of hospital stay after surgery. In addition 
to general surgery, good results have been described using its 
principles in patients undergoing laparoscopy. In a study group 
of 90 patients undergoing laparoscopic hysterectomy, it influ­
enced the optimization and acceleration of recoalescence, with­
out a concomitant increase in complications and readmissions 
[41]. Dominguez et al also demonstrated that the use of the 
ERAS protocol in laparoscopic radical cystectomy with of 1 il­
eal conduit resulted in shorter hospital stays and fewer read­
missions. In addition, they noted a reduction in the number 
of days patients maintained a nasogastric tube and a shorter 
length of stay in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) [42]. The conduct 
of the ERAS protocol, as mentioned above, should already be 
introduced before surgery, which requires informing the patient 
in advance to explain the various components of the protocol 
and its relevance. Also, before the procedure, no mechanical 
bowel preparation is recommended and a 6-hour fasting pe­
riod is instituted for solid foods and 2 hours for clear liquids. 
During the operation, it is important to maintain euvolemia 
with balanced fluids, where the optimal flow rate for laparo­
scopic surgery has been set at 3-5 ml/kg/h. Also, it is neces­
sary to keep the patient warm to maintain the temperature 
within 36°C±0.5, and to provide antibiotic and anticoagulant 
prophylaxis (compression stockings). Drains and nasogastric 
tubes are not recommended, and induction and maintenance 
of anesthesia should be carried out with short-acting agents, 
which is important from the anesthesiologist’s point of view. 
For 2 hours after surgery, FiO2 must be maintained at 0.5, and 
fluid therapy must be administered restrictively with balanced 
fluids. Oral intake should be introduced as early as 6 hours, 
optimally within 24 hours. Patient mobilization takes place on 
the first postoperative day, and the bladder catheter is recom­
mended to be removed within 24-48 hours. Pain therapy and 
treatments to prevent the onset of postoperative nausea and 
vomiting (PONV) are critically important in following ERAS in 
the context of laparoscopic procedures, as described in more 
detail in the following paragraphs [41,43].
Analgesia and Pain Management
Pain after laparoscopic surgeries can be severe and persistent, 
and every patient should receive appropriate analgesia. Three 
types of pain can be distinguished after laparoscopy: incision­
al, nociceptive, and visceral pain; inflammatory pain (as a re­
sult of tissue injury); and neuropathic pain. Single-treatment 
pain management is very rare; usually, a multimodal pain 
management protocol is used. For mild to moderate pain, it 
is recommended to use paracetamol and nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). In addition, NSAIDs along with 
glucocorticosteroids are dedicated to controlling the inflam­
matory component of pain. In case of severe pain, opioids are 
e945951-6
Indexed in:  [Current Contents/Clinical Medicine]  [SCI Expanded]  [ISI Alerting System]   
[ISI Journals Master List]  [Index Medicus/MEDLINE]  [EMBASE/Excerpta Medica]   
[Chemical Abstracts/CAS]
REVIEW ARTICLES
This work is licensed under Creative Common Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)
Radkowski P. et al: 
Anesthetic management for laparoscopic surgery
© Med Sci Monit, 2024; 30: e945951


more effective [44]. Local anesthetics, like bupivacaine inject­
ed into trocar wounds during surgery can, result in a reduc­
tion of abdominal wall pain by 1-1.5 points (on a pain scale 
of 0-10) [41,44]. Some patients, whose response to pain is 
worse or when higher doses of opioids are contraindicated, 
may need the addition of adjuvant compounds such as dex­
medetomidine or ketamine [40-44]. Proper analgesia is also 
essential for earlier patient discharge [41,44].
The PROSPECT working group issued recommendations de­
veloping anesthetic, analgesic, or surgical interventions in the 
background of laparoscopic cholecystectomy based on sys­
tematic reviews and randomized controlled trials (RCTs) [45]. 
According to the GRADE consensus, it is recommended to ad­
minister oral paracetamol and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs) or cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors preop­
eratively (GRADE A). If these medications are not given before 
the surgery, they can be administered intravenously (GRADE A 
and B). Continuing the use of paracetamol and NSAIDs postop­
eratively is also recommended (GRADE A). This review extends 
these recommendations to include the pre- and intraopera­
tive periods and introduces the use of a laparoscopic miniport 
(GRADE B). Preoperative gabapentinoids and the intraoperative 
use of topical lidocaine are not routinely recommended (GRADE 
D). Instead, local saline lavage with adequate venting of the 
peritoneal emphysema is advised (GRADE A). Techniques such 
as epidural anesthesia and spinal block are not recommended 
due to limited evidence and potential complications (GRADE D).
In the context of the ERAS protocol, in addition to the aforemen­
tioned nasal wound anesthesia, there is a clear stance on limit­
ing the use of opioid drugs due to their adverse effects, which 
primarily include nausea, vomiting, constipation, or postopera­
tive sleep disturbances (PSD), and replacing them with non-opi­
oid drugs. After surgery, analgesia should be administered orally 
on an individualized basis, depending on the patient’s preference 
and pain level [41,43]. Moreover, in gynecological laparoscopic 
procedures, non-opioid anesthesia (with esketamine and dex­
medetomidine used) was not inferior in terms of analgesic effect 
and stability of anesthesia during surgery to classical opioid tech­
niques (with sufentanil and remifentanil used). Non-opioid tech­
niques, although they resulted in prolonged wake-up time and 
return to orientation, contributed to a reduction in the occurrence 
of PONV and improved the quality of postoperative sleep [43].
Prevention of Postoperative Nausea and 
Vomiting (PONV)
Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) occur within 24 hours 
after surgery. Laparoscopic surgery is itself associated with an 
increased risk of PONV. Also, the risk of their occurrence de­
pends on the patient’s personal factors, surgical interventions, 
and anesthesia – the occurrence is favored by the use of nitrous 
oxide, neostigmine, or opioids. Therefore, effective prevention 
and treatment are crucial. Effective treatment options include 
metoclopramide, ondansetron, and dexamethasone, which not 
only work well in patients requiring opiates but also help reduce 
pain and shorten hospital stay. Studies highlight the importance 
of a multifaceted approach to prevent vomiting during laparo­
scopic surgeries, combining pharmacological and non-pharma­
cological methods tailored to individual patient needs [46]. A 
study by Zhong et al [46] analyzing 90 cases of patients under­
going laparoscopic gynecological, urological, and general sur­
gery operations suggests that an effective strategy for prevent­
ing PONV is the combination of ondansetron, dexamethasone, 
and acupressure at the P6 point. This combination significant­
ly reduces the incidence of PONV and the need for rescue an­
tiemetics compared to palonosetron alone, with notable bene­
fits observed at 6 and 12 hours postoperatively.
Various antiemetic medications such as dexamethasone, on­
dansetron, and ramosetron have been studied for their effec­
tiveness. Dexamethasone combined with ramosetron has been 
shown to significantly reduce the overall incidence of nausea 
during the first 48 hours after surgery. Additionally, the timing 
and dosage of antiemetics play a crucial role, as administering 
dexamethasone at the beginning of surgery and ondansetron 
towards the end can optimize the antiemetic effects. Adjusting 
doses based on patient-specific factors, such as weight and 
risk profile, is also recommended [47].
According to the recommendations of the ERAS protocol, to 
prevent PONV, in addition to the aforementioned pharmaco­
therapy, a carbohydrate-rich diet the day before surgery, short­
ened fasting with fluids to 2 hours before surgery, and early 
mobilization of the patient after surgery are recommended. In 
a further addition, limiting opioid usage due to its emetogen­
ic effects is a proven preventive measure [48,49]. This is sup­
ported by a previously cited study showing that opioid-free 
anesthesia in gynecologic laparoscopy resulted in, among oth­
er things, a reduction in the incidence of PONV compared to 
anesthesia with opioids [43].
Complications
Beyond the complications described in the first part of the ar­
ticle, which arise from the creation of pneumoperitoneum and 
hypercarbia, we can also distinguish traumatic complications 
resulting from surgical activity and the specificity of laparo­
scopic procedures [48].
Traumatic complications related to the introduction of needles 
or trocars primarily include bleeding and damage to the intes­
tines and visceral organs. Bleeding can occur from the anterior 
e945951-7
Indexed in:  [Current Contents/Clinical Medicine]  [SCI Expanded]  [ISI Alerting System]   
[ISI Journals Master List]  [Index Medicus/MEDLINE]  [EMBASE/Excerpta Medica]   
[Chemical Abstracts/CAS]
REVIEW ARTICLES
This work is licensed under Creative Common Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)
Radkowski P. et al: 
Anesthetic management for laparoscopic surgery
© Med Sci Monit, 2024; 30: e945951


abdominal wall at the site of trocar insertion, from the tearing 
of adhesions and scar tissue during the introduction of gas into 
the peritoneal cavity, and from damaged blood vessels. As a re­
sult, during laparoscopy, even significant vascular injury may go 
unnoticed, especially complications like venous tamponade and 
retroperitoneal hematomas may not be diagnosed until after sur­
gery. In extreme cases, the abdominal aorta may be damaged by 
the Veress needle or trocar. Bleeding is thought to be the most 
common cause of rare death during laparoscopy, which is, how­
ever, a rare complication [27,48]. As it is not possible to palpate 
the pulsating vessel during laparoscopy, techniques have been 
introduced to visualize the vessels. However, the proposed meth­
ods of Doppler ultrasonography or near infrared vein visualiza­
tion had some limitations. To circumvent these, an intelligent 
system that detects vascular and non-vascular areas by detect­
ing differences in total hemoglobin (HbT) and oxygen saturation 
(StO2) between tissues was investigated in preclinical studies [50].
The Veress needle or trocar may directly penetrate the intestine, 
with perforation usually involving the colon and less frequently 
the small intestine. Intestinal damage (particularly small and 
thus often unnoticed) can lead to peritonitis, the formation 
of inter-loop abscesses with a septic reaction. In such circum­
stances, proper diagnosis is often delayed, leading to extreme­
ly severe secondary complications and high mortality [48].
A mechanical complication of a misplaced trocar may also be 
pneumothorax; interestingly, an increase in IAP, the presence 
of a pleuroperitoneal fistula, or increased CO2 absorption may 
also contribute to its formation [49] Subcutaneous emphy­
sema occurs when trocars are placed outside the peritoneal 
cavity, or the continuity of fascial laminae is interrupted [2]. 
Furthermore, the gas embolism described in the first part of 
this article is also a complication of, among other things, di­
rect damage to the vessel [9].
Prolonged steep Trendelenburg positioning heightens the pre­
viously described risk of cerebral and upper airway edema and 
exacerbates ventilation and perfusion mismatch. Additionally, 
prolonged surgery in this position can lead to “well leg com­
partment syndrome,” a rare but serious complication [27].
A complication caused by development of peritoneal emphyse­
ma is the backflow of acidic digestive contents from the stom­
ach. The possibility of aspiration of acidic gastric contents has 
been associated with the Trendelenburg position and pneumo­
peritoneum, especially in obese patients. However, it appears 
that the incidence of this complication is low, as these opera­
tions are usually performed electively, and the tension of the 
lower esophageal sphincter increases in response to rising intra-
abdominal and gastric pressures. This mechanism reduces the 
possibility of regurgitation, vomiting, and, consequently, aspi­
ration syndrome. To enhance safety, it is recommended to ad­
minister metoclopramide orally or parenterally before the pro­
cedure. This medication can increase the tension of the lower 
esophageal sphincter and reduce the frequency of regurgita­
tion and aspiration. For patients with reflux, metoclopramide 
Venous return and CO and CI decrease
MAP increase
Changes in SVR, increase in pulmonary vascular resistance
Arrhythmias – bradycardia, tachyarrhythmias
Impaired tissue perfusion (myocardial ischemia, 
GFR decrease)
Oxidative stress
Hypercapnia, acidosis and impaired oxygen transport
CO2 embolism
Atelectasis, FRC decrease, impaired ventilation-to-perfusion 
ratio
Hypoxemia
Impairment of chest elasticity, lung compliance decrease, 
and airway pressure increase
ICP increased and CPP decrease, cerebral vessels 
vasodilatation
Pain complaints
Regurgitation, vomiting, aspiration of gastric contents, 
PONV
Table 1. Complications of laparoscopic surgery related to 
pneumoperitoneum and hypercarbia.
CO – cardiac output; CI – cardiac index; SVT – systemic vascular 
resistance; MAP – mean arterial pressure; GRF – glomerular 
filtration rate; CO2 – carbon dioxide; FRC – functional residual 
capacity; ICP – intracranial pressure; CPP – cerebral perfusion 
pressure; PONV – postoperative nausea and vomiting.
Bleeding from a damaged vessel, hematomas
Perforation of the gastrointestinal wall – peritonitis, 
abscesses, septic shock
Pneumothorax
Subcutaneous emphysema
CO2 embolism
PONV
Postoperative pain
Table 2. Complications of laparoscopic surgery related to related 
to mechanical damage.
CO2 – carbon dioxide; PONV – postoperative nausea and 
vomiting.
e945951-8
Indexed in:  [Current Contents/Clinical Medicine]  [SCI Expanded]  [ISI Alerting System]   
[ISI Journals Master List]  [Index Medicus/MEDLINE]  [EMBASE/Excerpta Medica]   
[Chemical Abstracts/CAS]
REVIEW ARTICLES
This work is licensed under Creative Common Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)
Radkowski P. et al: 
Anesthetic management for laparoscopic surgery
© Med Sci Monit, 2024; 30: e945951


or omeprazole is administered to lower the pH of gastric juice 
and minimize the effects of accidental aspiration.
Approximately 2-3% of all laparoscopic operations end in con­
version, meaning the procedure is extended to an open lap­
arotomy due to complications or the inability to perform the 
operation laparoscopically [48]. Adverse effects due to emphy­
sema formation and mechanical surgical complications are in­
cluded in Tables 1 and 2, respectively.
Conclusions
Laparoscopic surgery, involving the creation of pneumoperi­
toneum, significantly impacts physiological systems, neces­
sitating careful anesthetic management to mitigate adverse 
effects. Cardiovascular impact includes increased intra-ab­
dominal pressure compressing veins and arteries, raising cen­
tral venous pressure and peripheral vascular resistance. This 
compression reduces cardiac preload and increases afterload, 
leading to decreased cardiac output and impaired organ per­
fusion. CO2 absorption induces hypercarbia, increasing pulmo­
nary vascular resistance and causing myocardial depression. 
Monitoring capnia and maintaining appropriate intra-abdom­
inal pressure are crucial. Respiratory impact involves elevated 
intra-abdominal pressure compressing the diaphragm, reduc­
ing lung compliance and ventilation efficiency, potentially lead­
ing to atelectasis and hypoxemia. Techniques like the “open 
lung” method, with recruitment maneuvers and PEEP, can im­
prove lung aeration and gas exchange. Neurological impact in­
cludes increased intracranial pressure due to impaired venous 
outflow and CO2-induced cerebral vasodilation. Maintaining 
normocapnia through a ventilation rate appropriate to the 
clinical situation is essential to stabilize intracranial pressure. 
Sympathetic tone may increase, potentially causing bradyar­
rhythmias from vagus nerve stimulation. Absolute contraindi­
cations for laparoscopic surgery include hemodynamic shock, 
acute intestinal obstruction, and increased intracranial pres­
sure. Relative contraindications involve cardiac or pulmonary 
failure and pregnancy, particularly in the first and third tri­
mesters. Perioperative management includes airway control, 
where SADs can often be an equivalent alternative to ETTs. 
Volume-controlled and pressure-controlled ventilation meth­
ods both have advantages, with pressure-controlled ventila­
tion benefiting certain populations like the elderly and obese. 
Deep neuromuscular blockade improves surgical conditions 
and allows lower intra-abdominal pressures, reducing sys­
temic complications. Postoperative management focuses on 
effective pain control through multimodal analgesia, including 
paracetamol, NSAIDs, opioids, glucocorticosteroids, use of ad­
juvants, and local anesthetics infiltrations. Antiemetic strate­
gies, using medications like ondansetron or dexamethasone 
and opioid avoidance, are crucial for managing postoperative 
nausea and vomiting. Following the ERAS protocol in patients 
undergoing laparoscopy can enable faster recovery and dis­
charge from the hospital. In conclusion, anesthesia for lapa­
roscopic operations requires understanding the physiological 
impacts of pneumoperitoneum and meticulous perioperative 
management to ensure patient safety and optimal outcomes.
Future Directions
A thorough understanding of the mechanisms by which perito­
neal emphysema disrupts systemic homeostasis is important 
in several key areas. Optimizing IAP management is crucial, 
with studies aiming to determine the optimal IAP levels that 
balance surgical needs with minimal physiological disruption. 
Personalized IAP settings based on factors such as age, comor­
bidities, and BMI could help minimize complications. Improved 
monitoring techniques, such as advanced TEE and non-invasive 
ICP monitors, can enhance the detection and management of 
complications like CO2 embolism and cerebral perfusion chang­
es. Real-time monitoring could provide early warnings for time­
ly interventions. Research on ventilation strategies should com­
pare volume-controlled and pressure-controlled ventilation in 
different patient populations, including those with pre-exist­
ing respiratory conditions. This could refine guidelines for op­
timal ventilation management and help assess the long-term 
effects on postoperative outcomes. In addition, efforts should 
be made to popularize the use of SAD instead of classical en­
dotracheal intubation, as these methods are not inferior in ef­
ficacy in some cases, additionally providing more favorable he­
modynamic parameters and postoperative comfort of patients. 
Investigating the efficacy of pharmacological agents like dex­
medetomidine and glycine in preventing complications during 
and after laparoscopic surgery could improve care protocols. 
Exploring novel antiemetic combinations or prophylactic mea­
sures for PONV may enhance patient recovery. Further research 
into deep NMB in complex laparoscopic procedures could es­
tablish more precise guidelines. Evaluating the safety and ef­
fectiveness of various NMB depths, especially in patients with 
specific contraindications, would also be valuable. Developing 
nuanced guidelines for contraindications to laparoscopic sur­
gery, particularly for patients with cardiovascular, neurologi­
cal, or respiratory vulnerabilities, could improve outcomes. A 
comprehensive risk stratification model incorporating real-
time data and patient history could guide surgical planning. 
Exploring multimodal analgesia approaches, including local an­
esthetics, NSAIDs, and adjuvants, could enhance postoperative 
pain management. Longitudinal studies on different analgesic 
protocols could inform best practices. Research into minimal­
ly invasive techniques and their efficacy compared to tradi­
tional methods could advance surgical care. Clinicians should 
be encouraged to implement a perioperative ERAS protocol 
in patients undergoing laparoscopy, enabling faster recovery. 
e945951-9
Indexed in:  [Current Contents/Clinical Medicine]  [SCI Expanded]  [ISI Alerting System]   
[ISI Journals Master List]  [Index Medicus/MEDLINE]  [EMBASE/Excerpta Medica]   
[Chemical Abstracts/CAS]
REVIEW ARTICLES
This work is licensed under Creative Common Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)
Radkowski P. et al: 
Anesthetic management for laparoscopic surgery
© Med Sci Monit, 2024; 30: e945951


Encouraging interdisciplinary collaborations between anesthe­
siologists, surgeons, and critical care specialists could develop 
comprehensive perioperative care guidelines. Regular updates 
incorporating the latest evidence and advancements would en­
sure optimal patient care. These directions highlight the need 
for ongoing research and innovation to address the complex 
challenges of pneumoperitoneum and laparoscopic surgery, ul­
timately enhancing patient safety and outcomes.
Despite the successive evolution of laparoscopic techniques, 
robot-assisted surgery (RAS) is gaining in importance. There is 
still insufficient evidence to prove its superiority, but despite 
generating higher costs, there are reports of a higher safety 
profile of RAS or fewer conversions to conventional laparoto­
my compared to laparoscopic procedures [51].
References:
	 1.	Wang YR, Lu HF, Huo HC, et al. A network meta-analysis of comparison of 
operative time and complications of laparoscopy, laparotomy, and laparo­
scopic-assisted vaginal hysterectomy for endometrial carcinoma. Medicine 
(Baltimore). 2018;97(17):e0474
	 2.	Atkinson TM, Giraud GD, Togioka BM, et al. Cardiovascular and ventilato­
ry consequences of laparoscopic surgery. Circulation. 2017;135(7):700-10
	 3.	He H, Gruartmoner G, Ince Y, et al. Effect of pneumoperitoneum and steep 
reverse-Trendelenburg position on mean systemic filling pressure, ve­
nous return, and microcirculation during esophagectomy. J Thorac Dis. 
2018;10(6):3399-408
	 4.	Ali NA, Eubanks WS, Stamler JS, et al. A method to attenuate pneu­
moperitoneum-induced reductions in splanchnic blood flow. Ann Surg. 
2005;241(2):256-61
	 5.	Junghans T, Modersohn D, Dörner F, et al. Systematic evaluation of differ­
ent approaches for minimizing hemodynamic changes during pneumoperi­
toneum. Surg Endosc. 2006;20(5):763-69
	 6.	Junghans T, Neudecker J, Dörner F, et al. Effect of increasing cardiac pre­
load, sympathetic antagonism, or vasodilation on visceral blood flow dur­
ing pneumoperitoneum. Langenbecks Arch Surg. 2005;390(6):538-43
	 7.	Cekic B, Geze S, Ozkan G, et al. The effect of dexmedetomidine on oxida­
tive stress during pneumoperitoneum. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:760323
	 8.	Al-Saeedi M, Nickkholgh A, Schultze D, et al. Glycine protects the liv­
er from reperfusion injury following pneumoperitoneum. Eur Surg Res. 
2018;59(1-2):91-99
	 9.	Luo W, Jin D, Huang J, et al. Low Pneumoperitoneum pressure reduces gas 
embolism during laparoscopic liver resection: A randomized controlled tri­
al. Ann Surg. 2024;279(4):588-97.
	10.	Güldner A, Kiss T, Serpa Neto A, et al. Intraoperative protective mechanical 
ventilation for prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications: A com­
prehensive review of the role of tidal volume, positive end-expiratory pres­
sure, and lung recruitment maneuvers. Anesthesiology. 2015;123(3):692-713
	11.	Futier E, Constantin JM, Pelosi P, et al. Intraoperative recruitment maneu­
ver reverses detrimental pneumoperitoneum-induced respiratory effects in 
healthy weight and obese patients undergoing laparoscopy. Anesthesiology. 
2010;113(6):1310-19
	12.	Cinnella G, Grasso S, Spadaro S, et al. Effects of recruitment maneu­
ver and positive end-expiratory pressure on respiratory mechanics and 
transpulmonary pressure during laparoscopic surgery. Anesthesiology. 
2013;118(1):114-22
	13.	Kamine TH, Papavassiliou E, Schneider BE. Effect of abdominal insufflation 
for laparoscopy on intracranial pressure. JAMA Surg. 2014;149(4):380-82
	14.	Yashwashi T, Kaman L, Kajal K, et al. Effects of low- and high-pressure car­
bon dioxide pneumoperitoneum on intracranial pressure during laparo­
scopic cholecystectomy. Surg Endosc. 2020;34(10):4369-73
	15.	Chin JH, Kim WJ, Lee J, et al. Effect of positive end-expiratory pressure on 
the sonographic optic nerve sheath diameter as a surrogate for intracrani­
al pressure during robot-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy: A random­
ized controlled trial. PLoS One. 2017;12(1):e0170369
	16.	Bloomfield GL, Ridings PC, Blocher CR, et al. Effects of increased intra-ab­
dominal pressure upon intracranial and cerebral perfusion pressure be­
fore and after volume expansion. J Trauma. 1996;40(6):936-41; discussion 
941-43
	17.	Joseph A, Theerth KA, Karipparambath V, Palliyil A. Effects of pneumoperi­
toneum and Trendelenburg position on intracranial pressure and cerebral 
blood flow assessed using transcranial doppler: A prospective observation­
al study. J Anaesthesiol Clin Pharmacol. 2023;39(3):429-34
	18.	Barczyński M, Herman RM. Influence of different pressures of pneumoperi­
toneum on the autonomic system function during laparoscopy. Folia Med 
Cracov. 2002;43(1-2):51-58
	19.	Bickel A, Yahalom M, Roguin N, et al. Power spectral analysis of heart rate 
variability during positive pressure pneumoperitoneum: The significance 
of increased cardiac sympathetic expression. Surg Endosc. 2002 Sep;16(9): 
1341-44
	20.	Sato N, Kawamoto M, Yuge O, et al. Effects of pneumoperitoneum on car­
diac autonomic nervous activity evaluated by heart rate variability anal­
ysis during sevoflurane, isoflurane, or propofol anesthesia. Surg Endosc. 
2000;14(4):362-66
	21.	Dabush-Elisha I, Goren O, Herscovici A, Matot I. Bradycardia dur­
ing laparoscopic surgeries: A retrospective cohort study. World J Surg. 
2019;43(6):1490-96
	22.	Heyba M, Khalil A, Elkenany Y. Severe intraoperative bradycardia during lap­
aroscopic cholecystectomy due to rapid peritoneal insufflation. Case Rep 
Anesthesiol. 2020;2020:8828914
	23.	Sarli L, Costi R, Sansebastiano G, et al. Prospective randomized trial of low-
pressure pneumoperitoneum for reduction of shoulder-tip pain following 
laparoscopy. Br J Surg. 2000;87(9):1161-65
	24.	Williams B. Contraindications to laparoscopy. In: Tichansky D, Morton J, 
Jones D, editors. The SAGES manual of quality, outcomes and patient safe­
ty. Boston, MA: Springer; 2012;191-95
	25.	Yu SC, Chen SC, Wang SM, Wei TC. Is previous abdominal surgery a con­
traindication to laparoscopic cholecystectomy? J Laparoendosc Surg. 
1994;4(1):31-35
	26.	Frazee RC, Roberts JW, Symmonds R, et al. What are the contraindications 
for laparoscopic cholecystectomy? Am J Surg. 1992;164(5):491-94; discus­
sion 494-95
	27.	Hayden P, Cowman S. Anaesthesia for laparoscopic surgery. Contin Educ 
Anaesth Crit Care Pain. 2011;11(5):177-80
	28.	Yilmaz M, Turan A, Saracoglu A, Saracoglu K.T. Comparison of LMA protec­
tor vs. endotracheal tube in patients undergoing laparoscopic surgery: A 
randomised controlled trial. Anaesthesiol Intensive Ther. 2022;54(3):247-52
	29.	Lai CJ, Liu CM, Wu CY, et al. I-Gel is a suitable alternative to endotracheal 
tubes in the laparoscopic pneumoperitoneum and trendelenburg position. 
BMC Anesthesiol. 2017;17(1):3
	30.	Beleña JM, Ochoa EJ, Núñez M, et al. Role of laryngeal mask airway in lap­
aroscopic cholecystectomy. World J Gastrointest Surg. 2015;7(11):319-25
	31.	Tyagi A, Kumar R, Sethi AK, Mohta M. A comparison of pressure-con­
trolled and volume-controlled ventilation for laparoscopic cholecystecto­
my. Anaesthesia. 2011;66(6):503-8
	32.	Hassan RM, Mahmoud HO, Abd el Aal WA, et al. Comparative study between 
volume-controlled ventilation and pressure-controlled ventilation in pre­
vention of postoperative pulmonary atelectasis in morbidly obese patients 
undergoing laparoscopic gastric sleeve surgery. Ain-Shams J Anesthesiol. 
2020;12:38
	33.	Wang P, Zhao S, Gao Z, et al. Use of volume controlled vs. pressure con­
trolled volume guaranteed ventilation in elderly patients undergoing lapa­
roscopic surgery with laryngeal mask airway. BMC Anesthesiol. 2021;21:69
	34.	Gupta SD, Kundu SB, Ghose T, et al. A comparison between volume-con­
trolled ventilation and pressure-controlled ventilation in providing better 
oxygenation in obese patients undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy. 
Indian J Anaesth. 2012;56(3):276-82
e945951-10
Indexed in:  [Current Contents/Clinical Medicine]  [SCI Expanded]  [ISI Alerting System]   
[ISI Journals Master List]  [Index Medicus/MEDLINE]  [EMBASE/Excerpta Medica]   
[Chemical Abstracts/CAS]
REVIEW ARTICLES
This work is licensed under Creative Common Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)
Radkowski P. et al: 
Anesthetic management for laparoscopic surgery
© Med Sci Monit, 2024; 30: e945951


	35.	Assad OM, El Sayed AA, Khalil MA. Comparison of volume-controlled ven­
tilation and pressure-controlled ventilation volume guaranteed during lap­
aroscopic surgery in Trendelenburg position. J Clin Anesth. 2016;34:55-61
	36.	Honing M, Reijnders-Boerboom G, Dell-Kuster S, et al. The impact of deep 
versus standard neuromuscular block on intraoperative safety during lapa­
roscopic surgery: An international multicenter randomized controlled dou­
ble-blind strategy trial – EURO-RELAX TRIAL. Trials. 2021;22:744
	37.	Ledowski T. Muscle relaxation in laparoscopic surgery: What is the evidence 
for improved operating conditions and patient outcome? A brief review of 
the literature. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2015;25(4):281-85
	38.	Madsen MV, Staehr-Rye AK, Gätke MR, Claudius C. Neuromuscular block­
ade for optimising surgical conditions during abdominal and gynaecologi­
cal surgery: A systematic review. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2015;59(1):1-16
	39.	Suragul W, Tantawanit A, Rungsakulkij N, et al. Effect of local anaesthet­
ic infiltration on postoperative pain after laparoscopic cholecystectomy: 
Randomized clinical trial. BJS Open. 2022;6(3):zrac066
	40.	Jakobsson J, Sellbrant I, Ledin G. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy periopera­
tive management: An update. Ambul Anesth. 2015;53:S86408
	41.	Jimenez JCV, Serrano BT, Muñoz EV, et al. New surgical realities: 
Implementation of an enhanced recovery after surgery protocol for gyneco­
logical laparoscopy – a prospective study. Perioper Med (Lond). 2021;10(1):52
	42.	Domínguez A, Muñoz-Rodríguez J, Martos R, et al. Progressive perioperative 
benefits of laparoscopy in combination with an ERAS (Enhanced Recovery 
After Surgery) protocol in radical cystectomy with ileal conduit. Actas Urol 
Esp (Engl Ed). 2021;45(4):289-99
	43.	Chen L, He W, Liu X, et al. Application of opioid-free general anesthesia for 
gynecological laparoscopic surgery under ERAS protocol: A non-inferiority 
randomized controlled trial. BMC Anesthesiol. 2023;23(1):34
	44.	Sjövall S, Kokki M, Kokki H. Laparoscopic surgery: A narrative review of 
pharmacotherapy in pain management. Drugs. 2015;75:1867-89
	45.	Barazanchi AWH, MacFater WS, Rahiri JL, et al.; PROSPECT Collaboration. 
Evidence-based management of pain after laparoscopic cholecystectomy: 
A PROSPECT review update. Br J Anaesth. 2018;121(4):787-803
	46.	Zhong C, Mokhtar CA, Mohammad NA, et al. Comparison of the efficacy of 
acupressure on P6 point, dexamethasone and ondansetron versus palo­
nosetron monotherapy for preventing postoperative nausea and vomiting 
in laparoscopic surgery. Anaesth Pain Intensive Care. 2023;27:625-31
	47.	Kim JH, Kim JS, Jeon YG, et al. Effect of dexamethasone and ramosetron 
on the prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting in low-risk pa­
tients: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial. 
BMC Anesthesiol. 2023;23:363
	48.	Gajdosz R. Management and anesthesia of the patient for laparoscopic 
procedures. In: Kurs CEEA nr 6: Anesthesia depending on the condition of 
the patient, the type of surgical procedures and ways of organizing work; 
2012 Nov 28-Dec 1; Cracow, Poland; 250-53
	49.	Wu Q, Zhang H. Carbon dioxide pneumothorax following retroperitoneal 
laparoscopic partial nephrectomy: A case report and literature review. BMC 
Anesthesiol. 2018;18(1):202
	50.	Li CC, Lin BS, Wen SC, et al. Smart blood vessel detection system for lapa­
roscopic surgery. IEEE J Transl Eng Health Med. 2022;10:2500207
	51.	Hettiarachchi TS, Askari A, Rudge E, et al. Comparison of robotic vs laparo­
scopic left-sided colorectal cancer resections. J Robot Surg. 2023;17(1):205-13
e945951-11
Indexed in:  [Current Contents/Clinical Medicine]  [SCI Expanded]  [ISI Alerting System]   
[ISI Journals Master List]  [Index Medicus/MEDLINE]  [EMBASE/Excerpta Medica]   
[Chemical Abstracts/CAS]
REVIEW ARTICLES
This work is licensed under Creative Common Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)
Radkowski P. et al: 
Anesthetic management for laparoscopic surgery
© Med Sci Monit, 2024; 30: e945951
